All right, well,
i'Il open it up to questions.
Now if you have any questions about just
anything that we talked
about in the workshop.
I do wanna show you one thing though,
if we go to code sandbox.io.
And I'm gonna let's explore
search sandboxes and
the type x state view even
though this is a a reacts
workshop i wanna show
you that the reason that
we centralize and
we put all of our machine logic and
application logic within one machine.
The reason that we do that in next
state is cuz our logic becomes
something that is completely
agnostic to basically any framework.
So we could essentially copy and
paste that exact same timer machine,
put it in a view app and
have the timer work the exact same way.
So this is something that's really useful,
especially if you're not
committed to a framework or
you wanna share this between frameworks.
Or maybe you wanna share the exact same
logic between react and react native.
Or in the future if you want that same
logic to be on the both the front end and
back end or
in a different language altogether,
like there's a lot of possibilities here.
And so that's why i really enjoy
working with state machines and
state charts as a declarative
way of specifying your logic.
Cuz, you could create the exact
same logic in a view app.
So yeah.
All right.
So,
i guess i'll open it up to any questions
about basically anything that we talked
about in this workshop.
You were saying how,
the machine is language agnostic,
even application agnostic it.
So it's just super portable lwe're
Robson loading is a j s object here.
But someone was mentioning
before about serializing it
potentially or code gen tools to,
as part of a build step
have it included in the back end to or
wherever you need it.
Yeah so the question was
about just the usefulness and
basically the possibilities of
having this declarative format for
a machine and using it pretty
much anywhere and i actually
really wanna show you this thing that
has absolutely nothing to do with react,
or even JavaScript at all,
but is really cool.
So someone shrivel up.
He made a code generator
that generates c++ code.
From an X state machine.
So basically you can take these X state
machines and run them within a C++
application, which is something that
i haven't even dreamed of doing.
And yeah, so that's definitely
a possibility right there.
Just to show you how far you
can really go with this.
I had a question actually about the clock,
the foreign clock.
And so, yeah, so you are fetching
some data, from this world time API.
And you chose to use the react
query library for that, but.
Would you in general or why wouldn't you
why wouldn't you do that query as part of
the machine so,
lwhat you're doing is getting it and
then you having to do an effect and
inject it and all this kinda stuff, right?
But wouldn't you in
general maybe prefer to
add that as an invoked
step within your machine.
>> So, yeah, that's a great question.
The question was about the use of reacts
query over here to fetch data and
to do that separately
from the actual machine.
And so
the answer to that is sorta two fold.
First of all, i did it to demonstrate
how you would use a third party library.
A third party reacts library with that.
But also reacts query
currently doesn't expose
a way to do all of the caching
magic that it does.
So reacts query is
a really great library for
actually managing the caching of your
resources so you don't over fetch.
So if i'm doing something,
i go to another component or
components unmounted, and i remounted
it's gonna call that query again.
But the query is gonna say,
i already cached this exact
same thing that you want.
So here you go.
And obviously,
xe doesn't have that caching magic.
But reacts query internally has this
cache that's really smart about,
when to evict things from the cache or
when to hold things.
And because it doesn't expose it as a,
as a framework agnostic, tool or API,
we're sort of stuck with
using the hooks for that.
And Apollo clients sorta has the same
problem except that with Apollo clients,
i really actually like that.
It does expose the actual clients for you.
So if you don't wanna usethe hooks,
you could use that clients
object itself and be able to.
Put that in an invocation or
even as a side effects like you
using actions the next day.
>> Right?.
Yeah, so okay, so i understand that in
fact we use react query a little bit,
as well for those same caching reasons.
More what i was getting at was just
there's no real reason other than maybe
i want that extra caching function or
whatever, to just put my fetches and
stuff as as invoked.
Effects within the machine that's fine,
right there's.
People do that that's a cool thing to do
that there's no real reason other than,
i'm getting this extra function
out of some other library.
>> Right.
Yeah.
So again, the question was about using,
react query versus doing everything in
the machine if you wanna do everything
within the machine.
>> That's definitely allowed and
once reacts query hopefully in
the future once they have that,
their caching technology able
to be just imported without needing
to go through a react hook.
Then i will definitely.
Or someone can definitely
make a library or
you don't even really need a library for
that.
You could invoke that yourself and
use the cast directly through
either actions or, invocations.
>> Yeah, i was gonna say somebody needs
to make basically an xstate backed
version of react query and react router.
>> I wanna i definitely want to.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Every time i think about exit i'm man,
somebody needs to make
a rap router available.
>> [LAUGH] Yeah, well what's funny is,
Amber a long time ago,
someone actually made a,
Ember router using state charts.
Look at the year 2012 in 2012.
I was struggling with j query.
I wasn't doing anything related to
state charts or state machines,
but Ember very, early on.
They were actually using
statecharts all over the place.
So again, this is not new technology.
And funny enough, Ember was the first one
to do it or at least in the front end.
My last question, so
one of the biggiest difficulties
I've had is dealing with
the types with this.
Going through GitHub issues and stuff
on XState, I know that you're aware of
some of the pain points with pipes and
some of the problems that are there.
In fact, I ran into most of those
problems trying to create a react
query lite basically that was XState
back [LAUGH] because I wanted it but
I didn't wanted to use XState.
Anyway, the types ended up just
being an absolute nightmare.
I literally just dropped
it because of that.
But I'm just wondering what
are your plans to improve
the TypeScript experience for XState?
Cuz I see that as being the biggest
blocker in terms of adoption at my
company for XState.
>> Right, so the question was
basically the future of XState and
typing with TypeScript, which you know
definitely is a common pain points and
that's for a few reasons.
That's mainly because the things
that XState is trying to
do is sort of outside the realm
of what TypeScript can do.
But basically in version 5 we are going
to be improving the typing a lot,
and we are gonna be doing it by
basically simplifying parts of the API.
And also just trying to infer a lot more.
In fact, every single time that there's
a minor release or a major release of
TypeScript, we immediately say,
that solves a good chunk of our problems.
And so we're gonna see more and
more of that, especially with TypeScript,
you could now type template literals.
And so
that's going to be very helpful just for
being able to autocomplete
different states and
just targeting states,
especially the dot separated states.
Now it's very possible
to strongly type that.
Additionally, as was mentioned earlier,
there is a project called XState codegen,
which is really, really useful.
It basically generates the types for
you the same way that Prisma,
if you're familiar with Prisma,
would generate those types, too.
And so it advertises that it gives
you 100% TypeScript coverage of
XState in TypeScript.
So definitely recommend
taking a look at that,
because it's going to generate a lot
of the types that you would either have
to manually type or
that you would have a struggle, and
maybe look at the source code of XState
to figure out how those should be typed.
So again, version five, there is
gonna be a lot of simplification and
a lot of clean up of types,
as well as using a lot of new TypeScript
features in order to get those typings in.
And we're also experimenting
a lot with inference.
So basically making it so
that you don't have to pass context and
events inside the type arguments or
the generic parameters.
Instead, those are inferred from
what you put inside the object.
And so yeah,
we definitely have a lot of plans there.
So yeah,
definitely check out XState codegen.
I think, for current XState projects,
this is probably the most helpful thing.
And in version five,
I'm also gonna be adding a lot more
documentation on TypeScript usage as well.
>> There's a couple of questions in chat.
Is there a way to generate code from
a GUI when you're creating the charts?
Okay, so the question was,
is there a way to generate code from
some sort of program user interface?
There will be, there definitely will be.
It's something that I'm working on right
now, which is basically a drag and
drop editor where you could
create states and transitions.
And basically create the entire
state chart, export that as JSON,
and yeah,
just have that auto generated for you.
>> Is there any way we get a preview?
>> There is not [LAUGH].
But I will say that the project updates
are going to be on statecharts.io, and so
it's basically going to be what
you see with the inspector.
And so this inspector, it already works
with many things if you
allow pop ups over here.
Inspector is pretty much one way.
So it takes your machines defined here,
and it generates it visually for
you over here.
So just imagine in the future
that this will be something where
you could add states,
you could change transitions.
You could modify properties
on the right hand side, and
those are going to be reflected
back in here via a JSON file.
And you could pass that JSON
file into your machine.
And then you could, of course, add the
implementation details such as actions,
guards, services and all of that.
So, hopefully I will have
a preview by the end of the year.
No promises though [LAUGH], but yeah.
>> What are some types of things that
you shouldn't do inside state machines?
>> Okay, so the question was,
what types of things should you
not do inside of a state machine?
And the simple mathematical answer
to that is be non-deterministic.
Which sounds like a mouthful, but
what that basically means
is that in a state machine,
every single transition should
predictably go somewhere.
So there's no such thing
as saying on Toggle,
and doing Math.random is less than 0.5,
go to active.
Otherwise go to inactive,
something like that.
That's just not a thing and
it's not something that you should do.
Obviously that's a really silly example,
but
there is a reason why this machine is
created in such a declarative way.
And it's because when you have functions,
functions are really versatile,
you could do anything in a function.
However, that's also a problem, too,
because one of the best parts
about not only XState but
state machines and state charts is
that everything is predictable.
You could predict the future, not even
just what happened in the past, but
what can happen.
And that's just not cool from a, I could
time travel in the future type of thing.
But also when you're explaining
the logic of your application,
you want to be able to tell people,
whether they're technical or
not in this screen,
here's all of the things that can happen.
And here are the things that can't happen.
And when this thing happens, this is
what the next state is going to be.
So if you're working on either a plain
react application with Redux or
use Reducer, just something like that,
there's really no way
to predict what can happen next without
having to, I say there's almost no way.
I mean, obviously, you could Take
the function as a string and
break down the AST and do some
static analysis or whatever on that.
Or you could just use a JSON object and
be able to walk through the object and
be able to predict,
what can happen at any given time,
what are all the possible
states in my application?
Yeah, just making that predictable
is the number one rule in
using state machines and
state charts in general.
So, in that state specifically,
it follows that rule.
Don't mutate anything
outside of an action or yeah,
basically don't do any side effects
outside of actions, assign should be pure.
I mean, it will work,
like we previously talked about,
it will work if you mutate it, but
again, try to avoid that if you can.
And yeah, so basically the structure
provides that pit of success for you.
>> Had a question about bundle size,
I was checking out bundle phobia.
I know, x state for react is pretty tiny.
It's like 1.4 kilobytes and the XState.
I mean, it's not massive,
but it's like 16.4 and
I know where I work they're like we don't
have a lot of dependent third-party stuff.
But this really interests me and
just wondering if there is
any work on bundle size or
it's not really on the radar right now,
or is it really not a big deal?
>> I wanna show you a tweet about that,
I guess I can't find it.
But [COUGH] anyway there was
there was someone who actually
used XState in a major project and
was able to delete like,
I think around 8,000 lines of code,
just by using XState to
replace a lot of the logic.
So it's important to note that XState
is not just a state management library,
it's more of a state orchestration library
that has a lot of things built in,
which is what does contribute
to its bundle size.
And XState version five we are working on
ways to make it a lot smaller, especially
by making it more modular and making it so
that you only need to pick and
choose what you need and not everything
is exported in one giant spindle.
And in fact, you could use XState
that way as well even today.
You do have to go through
the awkward import for example,
create machine from xstate slash lib
slash machine or something like that.
But yeah, what I believe that
the the amounts that XState gives
to you in terms of features and
what you're able to do with the logic,
it eliminates a lot of code,
especially in my anecdotal experience.
But yeah, we are working on
shrinking the bundle size.
And if you only need state machines and
you don't need the nesting or the history
or parallel states or things like that,
then XState FSM is what you want.
It's only around one kilobyte,
so it's extremely minimal,
but it has the same
structure as XState itself.
>> Okay cool, cool, that's very helpful.
Thank you.
>> Yeah, all right, well,
if there are no other questions,
then I want to thank you all so much for
spending an entire day with me
working on XState and react.
And just, exploring from
the very basics to just some
advanced techniques like invoking and
spawning actors,
what you could do with XState
in react applications.
So I really hope you
enjoyed this workshop.
Thank you.
>> Thanks so much, David, it was awesome.
>> Thank you.